well well I wonder just to ask you then
at the top of Jacob's Ladder then you
take God to be there you take God to be
the thing on which all values hang on
slash the thing that grounds all of the
values to be clear are you happy to to
say that to say I believe in the
existence of God as the greatest
conceivable being let's say well I think
it's a it's it's in some ways it's a
matter of definition I guess I would I
it's a matter of definition so so
because before we can talk about whether
or not God exists we should have some
sense of exactly what it is that we're
talking about in the moment we're
talking about the highest conceivable
potential Unity but then I would also
say so it stands at the top but it also
stands in the top in a peculiar way and
this is definitely insisted upon in the
judeo-christian cannon because God is
inconceivable and ineffable and so even
if you do put him at the top as you
approach him he recedes and that
capacity to recede is infinite it's also
not within the scope of
conceptualization right I mean the the
classic atheists they they they do a
they perform a sort of slight of hand
and what their God is always the the
wise old man in the sky who's the
supersti who's the obstacle
superstitious obstacle to the progress
of science but that's not at all how God
is conceptualized in the biblical Corpus
I mean God is put at the top of Jacob's
lad but he's also ineffable and receding
well let's let's pick up on a few of
those ideas then um the first thing I
think that's worth pointing out is
obviously is as you've said there there
are conceptions of God in which God is
ineffable and there's a big debate as
you know there in philosophy of religion
to the extent to which God is ineffable
some people take God to be completely
ineffable you can't say anything
positive about God you can only say what
God's not in this view so God's not a
pineapple God's not an Adam Sandler
movie and thank God for that and God's
not this uh this delicious beer to my
side or anything like that so I can say
negative things about God but I can't
say anything positive because God's
beyond my own descriptions but I think
the majority of philosophers of religion
agree that you can say some things about
God dayart gives the example of trying
to get your arms around a great mountain
and the great mountain is God but you
can't understand God in his entirety you
can pick up a few rocks you can describe
a few rocks and say hey this is the
property of omnipotence omniscience Omni
benevolence consciousness
being immutable un changing and the like
and so I think there are some things we
can reasonably say that God must have as
part of God's Essence on this question
of oh let's um okay let's let's
go there are some things that we can
just pause for a moment some things we
can say about God's Essence such as this
right
okay just and just finally on this see
and because I know that you know your
your scripture very well I I don't know
my scripture certainly as as well as you
do I'm more from the camp of perfect
being theology as you know there are
three major strands of Theology and
philosophy which all try and arrive at a
different or the same definition of God
really a revelation theology looks at
religious experience and scripture and
tries to infer properties from God from
Revelation creation theology looks at
God's hand in the world and says well
God must be powerful enough to create
the world good enough to give us the
world and knowledgeable enough to give
us such a finely tuned universe and then
when we look at other versions like
perfect being Theology and this is the
version I think is the most reflective
of God is that God by definition must be
the greatest conceivable being if there
is a greater being than God then the
thing that you're talking about that
isn't the greatest thing isn't God God
must have all great making properties
that is power goodness knowledge and
anything else we take to be
intrinsically great at the top of
Jacob's Ladder if God has those things
then it is worthy of the name
God America's healthare system is
lacking in any real care insurance
companies regularly deny Progressive
treatment options primary care
physicians refuse to order comprehensive
lab work and the standards of care lag
years behind the leading research that's
where mer health comes in mer Health
represents a paradigm shift and how we
approach medicine the Premier Health
optimization platform mer Health
empowers you to maximize your longevity
and performance with the confidence that
comes from having experts in your back
pocket they offer Cutting Edge
diagnostic Labs concierge Health
coaching and expert clinical oversight
they help you achieve your health and
fitness goals by leveraging datadriven
lifestyle and nutrition recommendations
along with supplement and prescription
treatment options if you're listening to
this show then you're probably a
proponent of taking your health into
your own hands that's why we've teamed
up with mer Health to offer a turnkey
optimization package designed for those
who want to maximize their performance
and Longevity with the most elaborate
testing on the market you'll receive
extensive lab work thorough lab reports
video calls with Merck's Health experts
and expedited onboarding go to mer
health.com Peterson and use code
Peterson to get the same panel and
medical oversight I get and save 10% at
checkout that's mer health.com Peterson
and use code Peterson at checkout
okay so so with regards to the argument
about
ineffability mer eliad points out one of
the consequences of a God that's too
ineffable so a God that you can't
characterize this and he he's mapped out
the the death of God phenomenon across
many cultures and over many times and
what you often see happening when when a
culture emerges and begins to flourish
is that there's a revelation at its
beginning interestingly enough that has
a certain amount of psychological and
sociological energy and it unites people
it offers them a framework of meaning
that quells their anxiety and also a a
goal or a destination that imbus them
with positive emotion and that pulls the
culture together and then it happens
upon occasion that the Pinnacle value
that's posited by that culture comes
under rational assault or perhaps Falls
prey to conflict with other religions
and people start to doubt and the system
decays the death of god let's say well
eliad pointed out that a God that is so
ineffable that nothing can be said about
him tends to float off into what would
you say into the cosmic ether and leave
and lose his connection with humanity
and so I think it's better to think
about it as in a hierarchical manner and
so here's one way that I've come to
understand it that's both neuros
pychological and mythological at the
same time so you know in the story of
Exodus Moses is compelled forward to
take a position of leadership as a
consequence of his encounter with the
burning bush right the bush the bush is
a tree it's the tree of life and it's on
fire because it's alive and a burning
bush is a representation of that which
calls you forward that's a good way of
thinking about it now that takes
concrete form in your life right so you
might be attracted to a particular lover
you might be attracted to a particular
um uh profession or or a particular book
on a shelf when you walk into a library
like you get it's like a light turns on
and you're you're called forward to it
like a moth and then as you know as you
mature and you transform and the way
that you look at the world changes
the thing that compels your interest
transforms but then you could imagine
something at the bottom of that that's
constant across all those
Transformations that's like the spirit
of calling per se and it spirals you
upwards in a developmental path and it
recedes as you move towards it now that
that's one characterization of God
particularly in the Old Testament is God
is calling right and that's reasonably
well mappable I would say onto the
neurological systems that mediate
positive emotion because the positive
emotion systems do call you forward they
fill you with hope they fill you with
enthusiasm which is a word derived from
the phrase for being possessed by God
but it you know it's you can kind of
understand that behind all the things
that call approximately is the spirit
that calls
transcendentally and you could think of
the essence of that Spirit as a as a
closer approximation of the Divine
that's not a full characterization of
the Divine because you in in the Old
Testament for example you also have God
as the voice of conscience which is
quite different that's more of a
restrictive Voice or impulse so to speak
this is good though because I think that
these things that are in scripture
whether scripture is revealing truths or
it's revealing moral truths and the like
whether it's revealing symbols I take
your view to be their refle ing the
Divine there shophow would put it
schopenhauer's view of Aesthetics was
that when we're having an aesthetic
experience it Taps into the rhythm of
what he called the will so you're
tapping into the form of aesthetic
Beauty which I think your view is sort
of similar to their in terms of
scripture there's certainly parallels at
least but what I think's interesting
from a philosophical point of view is
and I think for people more generally is
whether these events are Concrete in the
sense that they're historical events and
second whether or not you do take this
God to be a perfect being like the god
of Ansel the god of aquinus the god of
Augustine like the classical conception
of God because I think there are a lot
of Christians out there at the moment
that are holding you up and saying look
Christianity's back here's Jordan
Peterson saying he's a Christian and
here's him talking about scripture like
new atheism's dead and here we are with
the resurrection of
Christianity but I don't think you're
the type of Christian which they have
traditionally had in mind for sure my
colleague at Durham University Philip
gof is he's either coming out or maybe
I'm going to be coming out for him here
as a heretical Christian and he thinks
you don't have to believe in a perfect
God and you don't have to believe that
the Christ event was a real event in in
order to be a Christian there is a
middle way between God and Atheism and
that's my view as an agnostic as well
there is a middle way it's just
different to perhaps yours and Philip GS
and I wonder like would you be happy to
be characterized in that middle ground
in finding new radical solutions to
what's been a very partisan debate
between theists and atheists well I I
think
[Music]